# Calendar heatmap

Function to plot a heatmap of a daily zoo object with a calendar shape

## Usage

``` r
calendarHeatmap(x, ...)

# S3 method for class 'zoo'
calendarHeatmap(x, from, to, date.fmt="%Y-%m-%d",
                main="Calendar Heat Map",
                col=colorRampPalette(c("red", "orange", "yellow", "white", 
                    "lightblue2", "deepskyblue", "blue3"),  space = "Lab")(8),  
                cuts, cuts.dec=0, cuts.labels, 
                cuts.style=c("fisher", "equal", "pretty", "fixed", "sd", 
                             "quantile", "kmeans", "bclust", "mzb"), 
                legend.title="", legend.fontsize=15,              
                do.png=FALSE, png.fname="mypng.png", png.width=1500, 
                png.height=900, png.pointsize=12, png.res=90,
                do.pdf=FALSE, pdf.fname="mypdf.pdf", pdf.width=11,
                pdf.height=8.5, pdf.pointsize=12, ...)
```

## Arguments

- x:

  daily zoo object to be plotted. Its maximum amount of daily data
  should be less than 6 years or otherwise it will not be plotted.

- from:

  Character indicating the starting date for subsetting `x`. It has to
  be in the format indicated by `date.fmt`.

- to:

  Character indicating the ending date for subsetting `x`. It has to be
  in the format indicated by `date.fmt`.

- date.fmt:

  character indicating the format in which the dates are stored in
  `from` and `to`, e.g. %Y-%m-%d. See ‘Details’ section in
  [`strptime`](https://rdrr.io/r/base/strptime.html).

- main:

  character, Main chart title.

- col:

  A color palette, i.e. a vector of n contiguous colors generated by
  functions like rainbow, heat.colors, topo.colors, bpy.colors or one of
  your own making, perhaps using
  [`colorRampPalette`](https://rdrr.io/r/grDevices/colorRamp.html). If
  none is provided, a color ramp with 8 colours is created using
  [`colorRampPalette`](https://rdrr.io/r/grDevices/colorRamp.html).

- cuts:

  Numeric, indicating the values used to divide the range of `x` in the
  legend of colours. If not provided, it is automatically selected as a
  function of `lenght(col)`.

- cuts.dec:

  Number of decimal places used to present the numbers in the legend of
  colours.

- cuts.labels:

  Character indicating the label to be used in the colour legend for
  each one of the values defined by `cuts`. If not provided,
  `as.character(cuts)` is used.

- cuts.style:

  discarded because takes too much time or not alway provide the
  required number of classes: "dpih", "headtails", "hclust", "jenks".

- legend.title:

  text to be displayed above the legend of colours.

- legend.fontsize:

  size of text (in points) used in the legend of colours.

- do.png:

  Do you want to write the figure as a .png file? logical, set TRUE to
  save the image.

- png.fname:

  character, indicating the name of the file (possibly with a meaninful
  file extension) that will be used to write the output file.

- png.width:

  numeric, the width of the device.

- png.height:

  numeric, the height of the device.

- png.pointsize:

  integer, the default pointsize of plotted text, interpreted as big
  points (1/72 inch) at `res` ppi.

- png.res:

  integer, the nominal resolution in ppi which will be recorded in the
  bitmap file, if a positive integer. Also used for units other than the
  default, and to convert points to pixels.

- do.pdf:

  Do you want to write the figure as a .pdf file? logical, set TRUE to
  save the image.

- pdf.fname:

  character, indicating the name of the file (possibly with a
  significant extension) that will be used to write the output file.

- pdf.width:

  numeric, the width of the device.

- pdf.height:

  numeric, the height of the device.

- pdf.pointsize:

  integer, the default point size to be used. Strictly speaking, in bp,
  that is 1/72 of an inch, but approximately in points. Defaults to 12.

- ...:

  further arguments passed to functions or from other methods. Not used
  yet.

## Details

The original function `calendarHeat` was developed by Paul Bleicher, as
an R version of a graphic from
http://stat-computing.org/dataexpo/2009/posters/wicklin-allison.pdf (not
available any longer). The original function was made available online
in 2009, but then it was removed. Now it is available at
<https://github.com/tavisrudd/r_users_group_1/blob/master/calendarHeat.R>.
The original function has "Copyright 2009 Humedica", but it was
distributed under the GPL-2 licence, as well as this new version of the
function.

This slighly modified verison of the function is also distributed under
the GPL-2 licence, and teh main changes with respect to the original
function are:  

1\) uses a zoo object instead of a numeric and character vector, for
values and dates, respectively.  
2) it allows a customisation of the mian title of the output figure.  
3) it allows a customisation of the color palette.  
4) it uses a categorical legend instead of a continuos one.  
5) it is named `calendarHeatmap` instead of `calendarHeat`.

## Value

The output of this function is a lattice figure with the calendar
heatmap

## Author

Mauricio Zambrano-Bigiarini, <mzb.devel@gmail.com>

## Note

The maximum amount of years to be plotted is six (6).

## See also

[`colorRampPalette`](https://rdrr.io/r/grDevices/colorRamp.html),
[`levelplot`](https://rdrr.io/pkg/lattice/man/levelplot.html)

## Examples

``` r
###########
# EXAMPLE 1: basic plotting of a calendar heatmap
###########

# Loading daily streamflow data for Karamet at Gorges.
data(KarameaAtGorgeQts)

x <- KarameaAtGorgeQts
x <- subdaily2daily(x, FUN=mean)

# Temporal subsetting for a amaximum of 6 years
x <- window(x, start="1980-01-01", end="1985-12-31")

# Calendar Heatmap, 8 colours and cuts defined using Fisher method 
calendarHeatmap(x)
#> Warning: var has missing values, omitted in finding classes

```
